Civil Procedure II					
Winter 2017
Elon University School of Law
Professor Fink
# Final Examination
Evil Corp. is a large multinational corporation operating in a wide variety of business sectors, including consumer financial services. Evil Corp. fills certain jobs under an “employee leasing” arrangement with HR-Worx, Inc. When Evil Corp. has a job opening, they submit a request to HR-Worx, which assigns a worker to fill the vacancy. HR-Worx handles recruitment, training, payroll, workers’ compensation and healthcare benefits for these workers. Evil Corp. defines their job duties, sets their hours and rate of pay, and supervises their work. If Evil Corp. doesn't think a worker assigned by HR-Worx has the necessary skill and experience, Evil Corp. may request that HR-Worx assign someone else. If Evil Corp. is unhappy with a worker’s performance, Evil Corp. may terminate the assignment and request that HR-Worx assign someone new. 
Pursuant to that arrangement, HR-Worx assigned Angela Moss to work at Evil Corp. In the course of her work, Moss discovered what she believed to be illegal and unethical business practices. Moss reported her concerns in an internal company email to the company CEO, Phillip Price, who sent the following message in response: 
> Angela:
> Thank you for sharing your concerns. I assure you, there is nothing improper going on at Evil Corp.  I would advise you not to mention this matter to anyone else, as it could have an adverse affect on the company and its employees. 
> - Phillip
A few days later, Price summoned Moss to his office and asked whether she had mentioned her suspicions about Evil Corp.'s business practices to anyone. After Moss assured Price that she had not, Price replied, “Good. Thing could go very badly for you if you did.” The conversation then turned to more personal matters. Price asked Moss whether she is “seeing anyone” and remarked, with a disturbing leer, “You are a very attractive and charming young woman. I look forward to getting to know you much better.”
Over the next several days, Moss ruminated on her encounters with Price. She became convinced of two things: First, that her suspicions about illegal and unethical practices at Evil Corp. were correct and that Price was trying to cover up whatever is going on. Second, that Price had taken a highly inappropriate and unprofessional interest in her. Moss decided to ignore the second for the time being, but to act on the first. She contacted the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) [The CFPB is a federal government agency that enforces various federal laws regulating consumer financial services. ] and reported her suspicions about Evil Corp.’s business practices. 
Based on the information Moss provided, the CFPB launched an investigation into Evil Corp.’s consumer financial services operations. When Price received a notice of the CFPB’s investigation, he immediately suspected that Moss has defied his warning. Price again summoned Moss to his office and asked if she had spoken with the CFPB. Fearing retaliation, Moss denied having done so and told Price it must have been someone else. “I hope so,” Price replied menacingly, “because if it was you, it could be the end of this company and the end of your career. That would be a terrible shame, because I enjoy having you around.”
Fearing that her job was in jeopardy, Moss consulted with a lawyer, who advised her about the protections for employee whistleblowers under the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank”): [Dodd-Frank is a federal statute that, among other things, established the CFPB and gave it regulatory authority under various federal statutes regulating consumer financial services.]
(1) Prohibition against retaliation.
(A) In General. No employer may discharge, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, directly or indirectly, or in any other manner discriminate against, a whistleblower in the terms and conditions of employment because of any lawful act done by the whistleblower—
(i) in providing information to the [CFPB] in accordance with this section;
[ … ]
(B) Enforcement.
(i) Cause of Action. An individual who alleges discharge or other discrimination in violation of subparagraph (A) may bring an action under this subsection in the appropriate district court of the United States for the relief provided in subparagraph (C). 
[ … ]
The remedies available to a prevailing plaintiff include reinstatement; money damages; and attorney’s fees, litigation expenses, and costs of suit. 
Moss decided to sue and the attorney commenced an action in federal court, asserting a Dodd-Frank whistleblower claim against Evil Corp. The complaint alleged that Moss was an employee of Evil Corp., that she provided information to the CFPB about Evil Corp.’s business practices, and that Price threatened her with retaliation for doing so. 
Following discovery, each party filed a motion for summery judgment under FRCP Rule 56. Moss’s motion argued that the evidence in the record established all the elements of her whistleblower claim. Evil Corp.’s motion argued that the court should dismiss the suit on two grounds: 
    • The evidence in the record established that Moss was an employee of HR-Worx and not an employee of Evil Corp., and 
    • The evidence in the record was insufficient to establish that Evil Corp. illegally threatened or otherwise discriminated against Moss. 
The court denied Moss’s motion and granted Evil Corp.’s motion, issuing a written decision containing Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (see Memorandum and Order). After consulting with her attorney, Moss decided not to appeal. 
Meanwhile, Moss continued working at Evil Corp. Shortly after the court dismissed her suit, Moss was surprised to receive a message from Price inviting her to dinner at a very elegant and expensive restaurant. Hoping that it would be an opportunity to smooth things over, Moss accepted. Arriving at the restaurant, Moss was directed to a private room where Price was seated on a small sofa beside a table with a half-empty wine bottle and two glasses. 
There were no other seats, so Moss reluctantly set next to Price, who took her hand and said, with a creepy smile, “It’s so good to see you Angela.” Moss disengaged her hand and said nothing. Leaning far too close for comfort, Price then said, “Angela, my dear, you really should be less stand-offish. Most other employers would have fired you for the stunt you pulled. Fortunately for you, I am a very forgiving man. If you play your cards right, you can have a very bright future here. All I’m asking is for a little something in return.” Then, as if his intentions were not already clear enough, he winked and patted Moss on the knee. 
Shocked and outraged at this unwelcome advance, Moss rushed from the room, hailed a cab, and went home. The following morning, as Moss was about to leave for work, she received a phone call from HR-Worx informing her that Evil Corp,. had terminated her job assignment and requested that HR-Worx assign someone else in her place. Moss asked why, but was told, “we didn’t ask and they didn’t tell.”
Moss immediately phoned the lawyer who had represented her in the previous suit. After hearing what had happened, the lawyer concluded that Moss had a strong claim for employment discrimination based on sexual harassment. Once again, the lawyer filed a suit on behalf of Moss in federal court. [Assume that the federal court has subject matter jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1332 based on diversity of citizenship.] The complaint asserted claims against Evil Corp. for employment discrimination under both federal and state law. 
## Question 1
Under state law, a successful plaintiff in an employment discrimination suit may recover damages in an amount equal to three times the plaintiff’s annual salary of wages. Moss earned $100,000/year at Evil Corp., meaning she would be entitled to $300,000 in damages under state law. 
In contrast, federal law imposes a monetary cap, based on the size of the employer, in an employment discrimination suit. For an employer of Evil Corp.’s size, the maximum damages permitted under federal law would be $100,000. 
Should the federal court apply federal or state law to determine the amount of damages Moss may recover if she prevails on her claims?
## Question 2
Evil Corp. files a motion for summary judgment, arguing that claim preclusion (based on the judgment in the prior suit) bars Moss’s employment discrimination claims. 
Moss files a motion for partial summary judgment arguing that issue preclusion (based on the judgment in the prior suit) applies to the issue of whether she was an employee of Evil Corp. (an element of her federal and state employment discrimination claims). 
How should the court rule on these motions?
