---
layout: case

course: Civil Procedure 
title: 'Sevier v. Lowenthal'
cite: '302 F.Supp.3d 312'
court: 'D.D.C.'
published: '2018'
    
---

## MEMORANDUM OPINION

## RANDOLPH D. MOSS, United States District Judge.

Plaintiff Chris Sevier, proceeding _pro se,_ seeks the removal of "the Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flag" from "the halls and public access way[s] of Federal legislative buildings." "[H]omosexuality," he says, "is a religion," which the public display of the gay pride flag impermissibly favors. According to Sevier, display of the flag violates the Establishment Clause, discourages him from lobbying Congress, and violates his rights to equal protection and substantive due process. Sevier has made similar claims in, by his count, "more than [fifteen]" other lawsuits.[^2] In addition, Sevier asks that the Court "declare that the holdings in _United States v. Windsor,_ ... and _Obergefell v. Hodges,_ ... are intellectually dishonest and amount to acts of judicial tyranny and judicial malpractice." 

Currently pending before the Court are Defendants' motion to dismiss, Sevier's motion for leave to amend his complaint, a motion to intervene,[^1] and numerous other motions. For the reasons explained below, the Court will GRANT Defendants' motion to dismiss [ … ].

## I. BACKGROUND

Sevier's complaint consists largely of his views regarding homosexuality and criticisms of the Supreme Court's _Obergefell_ decision. It also recounts Sevier's efforts to "put[] [_Obergefell_] to the test" by marrying inanimate objects. The present action appears to focus, however, on the following allegations: Defendants, who are four members of the U.S. House of Representatives, have allegedly "authorized and installed [one or more] Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flag[s]" in the hallways outside their offices, which Sevier "frequently encounter[s]". Given Sevier's "religious worldview" that "homosexuality is obscene, immoral, [and] subversive to human flourishing," he "[i]s offended by [the flags'] presence". The flags, he says, make him "feel[] unwelcome[]," because he does not "adhere to [Defendants'] particular religious orthodoxy".

The "religious ideology" that Sevier has in mind is homosexuality itself. He contends that "the [h]omosexual church" is "the largest denomination" of "the overall church of western expressive individualism postmodern moral relativism," which posits that "nobody's version of morality as a basis of law matters except for the private moral code that [the adherent] personally advocat[es]," In Sevier's view, then, the gay pride flag "is a `religious symbol' for the homosexual denomination," and its "placement ... amounts to [Defendants'] endorsement of a particular religion".

The public display of these flags, moreover, allegedly "treats different sects within the church of moral relativism with different degrees of favorability." Sevier says he belongs to "a less popular sect" of the church of moral relativism, which he calls the "machinist sect[]". As a "machinist," Sevier's "sex-based self-asserted identity narrative is that he prefers to be married to an inanimate object." So, according to Sevier, unless Defendants "install a flag that represents people who self-identify as polygamists, machinists, zoophiles, and heterosexuals," their actions "treat ... the homosexual denomination of ... the church of moral relativism with disproportionate favor".

Based on these allegations, Sevier alleges violations of the Establishment, Equal Protection, and Due Process clauses. He seeks an injunction requiring that Defendants remove the flags, or, in the alternative, "fly the [f]lags that represent the people in the zoophile, polygamy, and machinism sects [of] the overall church of moral relativism." He also seeks declaratory judgments that (1) Defendants' display of the flags "is unconstitutional;" (2) that _Obergefell_ and _Windsor_ are "intellectually dishonest ... acts of judicial tyranny and judicial malpractice;" and (3) that "homosexuality is a `religion'... [that the] government cannot legally recognize."

Sevier's initial lawsuit was filed on March 23, 2017, he filed a motion for summary judgment. On August 15, 2017, John Gunter Jr., Whitney Kohl, and Joan Grace Harley — "three self-identified polygamists" who appear to be coordinating with Sevier in this and other cases — moved to intervene as of right under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 24(a)(2), or alternatively, to intervene permissively under Rule 24(b)(1)(B). Gunter, Kohl, and Harley allege Equal Protection, Due Process, and Establishment Clause claims that are similar in form to those advanced by Sevier, although their allegations of injury focus even more on their opposition to gay marriage generally and their "feel[ing] deeply offended" by "[t]he Defendants['] display of the gay pride flag for self-serving political reasons." 

On September 22, 2017, Defendants—four members of the House of Representatives who have displayed the flags outside their offices—moved to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) on the grounds that Sevier lacks standing and that the case presents a nonjusticiable political question; under Rule 12(b)(5) for insufficient service of process; and under Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim. They ask also that the Court treat their motion to dismiss as an opposition to the motion to intervene and Sevier's motion for summary judgment. Because Defendants' motion raises a number of threshold issues, the Court denied Sevier's motion for summary judgment as premature, and ordered him to respond to Defendants' motion to dismiss. Instead, he filed two "affidavits" in support of his complaint. Then, on October 2, 2017, he moved to stay these proceedings pending the resolution of his motion to intervene in _Masterpiece Cakeshop, Ltd. v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission,_ a case currently before the Supreme Court. The Court denied that motion, and Sevier continued to file affidavits in support of his complaint. On October 7, 2017, Sevier filed a "motion for the court to make an expedited ruling on the intervention motion." Although not styled as such, this document responds to the arguments made in Defendants' motion to dismiss.

[ * * * ]

## II. LEGAL STANDARD

A. Motion to Dismiss Under Rule 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6)
Defendants have first moved under Rule 12(b)(1) to dismiss the case for lack of 317*317 subject matter jurisdiction. "The party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing" each of the elements of Article III standing, although "the manner and degree of evidence required" varies with "the successive stages of the litigation." Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561, 112 S.Ct. 2130, 119 L.Ed.2d 351 (1992). "At the pleading stage, general factual allegations of injury resulting from the defendant's conduct" will often suffice. Id.; see also Owner-Operator Indep. Drivers Ass'n v. Dep't of Transp., 879 F.3d 339, 346-47 (D.C. Cir. 2018). "[T]hreadbare recitals of the elements of [standing], supported by mere conclusory statements," however, will not. Arpaio v. Obama, 797 F.3d 11, 19 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (quoting Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937, 173 L.Ed.2d 868 (2009)). The Court need not "assume the truth of legal conclusions" nor must it "accept inferences that are unsupported by the facts set out in the complaint." Id. (quoting Islamic Am. Relief Agency v. Gonzales, 477 F.3d 728, 732 (D.C. Cir. 2007)) (internal quotation marks omitted).

Defendants have also moved to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). Such a motion is designed to "test[] the legal sufficiency of a complaint." Browning v. Clinton, 292 F.3d 235, 242 (D.C. Cir. 2002). In evaluating such a motion, the Court "must first `tak[e] note of the elements a plaintiff must plead to state [the] claim' to relief, and then determine whether the plaintiff has pleaded those elements with adequate factual support to `state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Blue v. District of Columbia, 811 F.3d 14, 20 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (quoting Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 675, 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937) (alterations in original) (citation omitted). The Court need not accept as true legal conclusions disguised as factual allegations, "`naked assertions' devoid of `further factual enhancement,'" or a "`formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action.'" Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937 (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 557, 127 S.Ct. 1955, 167 L.Ed.2d 929 (2007)) (alterations omitted). The plaintiff, however, is entitled to "the benefit of all inferences that can be derived from the facts alleged." See Am. Nat'l Ins. Co. v. FDIC, 642 F.3d 1137, 1139 (D.C. Cir. 2011) (quoting Thomas v. Principi, 394 F.3d 970, 972 (D.C. Cir. 2005)).

[ * * * ]

## III. ANALYSIS

A. Motion to Dismiss
Defendants advance several arguments in their motion to dismiss. First, they contend that the Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction because Sevier does not have standing to challenge the display of the rainbow flags at issue and, in any event, regulation of the display of such flags presents a nonjusticiable political question. Dkt. 8 at 10. Second, they argue that service was defective. Id. Third, they contend that Sevier has failed to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. Id. Fourth, they argue that the complaint is frivolous and should be dismissed under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2). Id. The Court first addresses its subject matter jurisdiction, before turning to the merits.

Defendants correctly observe that Sevier's pleadings allege various injuries that are insufficient to establish Article III standing. The Court here, however, focuses on what it reads to be the nub of his complaint: "As a lobbyist in DC ... Plaintiff has to frequently encounter the Gay Pride Rainbow Flag in the public hallways of these federal buildings, where he often goes to lobby [for] legislation .... The Plaintiff feels unwelcome[] to access the buildings, to approach the Defendants, and to consult with other members of the Democratic Party ...." Dkt. 1 at 5 (Compl. ¶ 12). Sevier also asserts that his "principal place of business is in the District of Columbia," id. at 4-5 (Compl. ¶ 11), and that he "has regular and unwanted direct contact with the" flags, Id. at 6 (Compl. ¶ 14). Given that the Court now reviews the complaint on a motion to dismiss, these allegations suffice for standing to seek an injunction barring the display of the flags. See In re Navy Chaplaincy, 534 F.3d 756, 762-63 (D.C. Cir. 2008) (observing that while "mere personal offense to government action does not give rise to standing to sue," 319*319 in numerous "religious display and prayer cases ... courts have found (or at least apparently assumed)" that standing exists when the government "engag[es] in religious speech that was observed, read, or heard by the plaintiffs"); Books v. City of Elkhart, 235 F.3d 292, 298-301 (7th Cir. 2000) (holding that being "required to come in direct and unwelcome contact with the religious display in order to participate fully in government" established standing); Felix v. City of Bloomfield, 841 F.3d 848, 854-55 (10th Cir. 2016) (holding that plaintiffs who frequently drive or walk by a Ten Commandments monument have standing); Suhre v. Haywood Cty., 131 F.3d 1083, 1086 (4th Cir. 1997) ("The injury that gives standing to plaintiffs in [the religious display] cases is that caused by unwelcome direct contact with a religious display that appears to be endorsed by the state. Such personal contact with state-sponsored religious symbolism is ... the injury ...."); Newdow v. Bush, 391 F.Supp.2d 95, 103 (D.D.C. 2005) ("In the religious-display cases, a personal connection [sufficient for standing] exists if a plaintiff is a member of the community in which the challenged religious exhibit is displayed, or if the plaintiff frequently visited the site of the display."); see also Valley Forge Christian Coll. v. Ams. United for Separation of Church & State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 485-87, 102 S.Ct. 752, 70 L.Ed.2d 700 (1982) (considering, when evaluating standing, the location of an action alleged to violate the Establishment Clause, the residence of the plaintiffs, and whether the action was learned of by the plaintiffs personally or conveyed through other means).

Defendants' argument that the political question doctrine deprives the Court of jurisdiction also fails because, as Defendants note, "[t]he authority possessed by the House to make its own rules is bounded only by `constitutional restraints and fundamental rights.'" Dkt. 8 at 22 (quoting Rangel v. Boehner, 20 F.Supp.3d 148, 168 (D.D.C. 2013)). Sevier alleges Defendants' actions run afoul of constitutional restraints (most notably the Establishment Clause). The political question doctrine, accordingly, does not prevent the Court from considering whether the actions of members of Congress inside the halls of the House may in fact violate the Establishment Clause.

The Court will nevertheless grant the motion to dismiss because Sevier has failed to state a claim for a violation of the Establishment, Equal Protection, or Due Process clauses. With respect to Sevier's Establishment Clause claim, he contends that his allegations must be measured against the three-pronged test first set forth in Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 612-13, 91 S.Ct. 2105, 29 L.Ed.2d 745 (1971). See, e.g., Dkt. 1 at 28 (Compl. ¶ 70). The Supreme Court, however, has offered conflicting signals about what standard currently applies in Establishment Clause challenges to religious displays in or near government buildings. Compare Van Orden v. Perry, 545 U.S. 677, 686, 125 S.Ct. 2854, 162 L.Ed.2d 607 (2005) (plurality opinion) ("Whatever may be the fate of the Lemon test in the larger scheme of Establishment Clause jurisprudence, we think it not useful in dealing with the sort of passive monument that Texas has erected on its Capitol grounds."), with id. at 700, 125 S.Ct. 2854 (Breyer, J., concurring in the judgment) (rejecting formal tests as no "substitute for the exercise of legal judgment" that "take[s] account of context and consequences measured in light of th[e] purposes" of the Religion Clauses, but treating the Lemon test as a "useful guidepost[]"), and McCreary Cty. v. ACLU of Ky., 545 U.S. 844, 859-65, 125 S.Ct. 2722, 162 L.Ed.2d 729 (2005) (applying the Lemon test on the same day Van Orden was decided). The D.C. Circuit has not decided a religious display case after Van Orden 320*320 and McCreary County, but in other contexts continues to apply a modified version of the Lemon test. See, e.g., In re Navy Chaplaincy, 738 F.3d 425, 430-31 (D.C. Cir. 2013). Numerous Courts of Appeals considering the continuing vitality of Lemon in religious display cases, moreover, have concluded that Justice Breyer's opinion in Van Orden controls. See, e.g., Am. Humanist Assoc. v. Maryland-Nat'l Capital Park & Planning Comm'n, 874 F.3d 195, 205 (4th Cir. 2017) (collecting cases). On that reading of the case, the Court "did not overrule Lemon" because "Justice Breyer actually recognized Lemon" as merely a "more formal" articulation of his context-driven approach. Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).

Regardless of whether Lemon or the Van Orden plurality sets forth the relevant test, Plaintiff has failed to state a claim. Under Lemon, government actions must "(1) have a secular legislative purpose; (2) have a principal or primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion; and (3) not result in excessive entanglement with religion or religious institutions." In re Navy Chaplaincy, 738 F.3d at 430 (quoting Bonham v. D.C. Library Admin., 989 F.2d 1242, 1244 (D.C. Cir. 1993)). The Van Orden plurality held that "the nature of the [religious display] and ... our Nation's history" were the only relevant considerations. 545 U.S. at 686, 125 S.Ct. 2854. Both approaches thus require that a plaintiff, as an initial matter, identify a government display that could reasonably be understood as "religious" in character. See Van Orden, 545 U.S. at 682-83, 125 S.Ct. 2854 (plurality opinion) (affirming district court holding "that a reasonable observer, mindful of the history, purpose, and context [of the religious display in question], would not conclude that th[e] passive monument conveyed the message that the State was seeking to endorse religion"); McCreary Cty., 545 U.S. at 869, 125 S.Ct. 2722 (considering whether a "reasonable observer could ... think that the Counties meant to emphasize and celebrate the [religious display's] religious message); id. at 866, 125 S.Ct. 2722 ("[T]he reasonable observer in the endorsement inquiry must be deemed aware of the history and context of the community and forum in which the religious display appears." (quoting Capitol Square Review & Advisory Bd. v. Pinette, 515 U.S. 753, 780, 115 S.Ct. 2440, 132 L.Ed.2d 650 (1995) (O'Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment))); Daniel Chapter One v. FTC, 405 Fed.Appx. 505, 506 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (holding that an Establishment Clause claim based on something other than a government action that is religious in character rests "upon a faulty premise").

Sevier has not cleared this initial hurdle. His claim rests on the premise that "homosexuality is a religion" within the meaning of the Establishment Clause. Dkt. 1 at 16 (Compl. ¶ 32). Elsewhere he describes homosexuality as a "sect/denomination of the `sex-based self-asserted' religion of `western postmodern expressive individualism moral relativism.'" Id. at 6 (Compl. ¶ 15). Sevier offers no legal support for this proposition. Instead, he has presented the Court with thousands of pages of news clippings and affidavits from his supporters expressing their opposition to homosexuality, and more recently, with filings from other litigation in which he alleges similar injuries. To be sure, the governing case law does not precisely define the contours of what constitutes "religion." See Alvarado v. City of San Jose, 94 F.3d 1223, 1227 (9th Cir. 1996) (observing by way of explanation that "Establishment [Clause] cases usually ... involve well-known religions" and that "defin[ing] religion... is a notoriously difficult ... task"). But that does not mean there are no easy cases. To the contrary, courts are well-equipped to weed out spurious Establishment Clause "religions" on grounds of 321*321 common sense. See, e.g., Daniel Chapter One, 405 Fed.Appx. at 506 (rejecting "scientism"); Peloza v. Capistrano Unified Sch. Dist., 37 F.3d 517, 520-21 (9th Cir. 1994) (rejecting "evolutionism," i.e., the view that "higher life forms evolved from lower ones"); United States v. Allen, 760 F.2d 447, 449-51 (2d Cir. 1985) (rejecting "nuclearism," i.e., the view that nuclear weapons are "sacred objects"); see also Altman v. Bedford Cent. Sch. Dist., 245 F.3d 49, 79 (2d Cir. 2001) (holding that an "objective observer" would not consider a public school's celebration of Earth Day to be a religious endorsement).

Common sense similarly forecloses Sevier's claim here. Whatever else religion might entail, it at minimum requires adherence to one or more fundamental beliefs. See, e.g., Kalka v. Hawk, 215 F.3d 90, 98-99 (D.C. Cir. 2000). "Homosexuality," by contrast, is not a set of beliefs at all. It is a description of a person's sexual orientation. Similarly, the argument that acceptance of homosexuality constitutes a "religion" — if that is what Sevier means to assert — also fails.[1] The gay rights movement bears no trappings of "religion" as that concept is widely understood, and Sevier has not plausibly alleged that a reasonable person would perceive the display of the rainbow flags as religious in nature. See, e.g., Africa v. Pennsylvania, 662 F.2d 1025, 1032, 1035 (3d Cir. 1981) (religious "indicia" include "address[ing] fundamental and ultimate questions having to do with deep and imponderable matters;" creating a "comprehensive ... belief[]system;" and displaying "[s]tructural characteristics" like "ceremonial functions" and "observance of holidays"). Nor has Sevier alleged that participants in the gay rights movement consider it "religious" or, indeed, that there are any self-identified adherents to the "religion" he posits. Cf. Allen, 760 F.2d at 450 (refusing "to recognize as a `religion' what the religion's alleged adherents have not identified as such"). That Sevier's own beliefs may derive from his religion does not transform any contrary view of the subject into religious expression. See, e.g., Altman, 245 F.3d at 78 ("[T]he Establishment Clause is not transgressed merely because a statement either is in agreement with, or is in disagreement with, a given religious tenet."). Sevier does make passing reference to "secular humanism," "moral relativism," "individualism," and other concepts that could conceivably constitute a set of religious beliefs for the purposes of an Establishment Clause claim. He has not, however, alleged any plausible link between those more general moral philosophies and the "Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flags" he argues have actually caused his injury, leaving his claims untethered from anything resembling a religion for Establishment Clause purposes. See, e.g., Dkt. 1 at 28 (Compl. ¶ 66).

In short, Sevier's argument proves way too much. If the mere acceptance of homosexuality — or support for gay rights — constitutes a "religion" for Establishment Clause purposes, then the same conclusion would presumably follow for any value judgment about how people should or should not live their lives. The Establishment Clause's meaning is not so capacious. See, e.g., United States v. Seeger, 380 U.S. 163, 165, 85 S.Ct. 850, 13 L.Ed.2d 733 322*322 (1965) (recognizing distinction between religious beliefs and those that are "essentially political, sociological, or philosophical"); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 215-16, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972) (same). As the Ninth Circuit put it:

"[I]f anything can be religion, then anything the government does can be construed as favoring one religion over another, and ... the government is paralyzed ...." While the First Amendment must be held to protect unfamiliar and idiosyncratic as well as commonly recognized religions, it loses its sense and thus its ability to protect when carried to [such] extreme[s] ....
Alvarado, 94 F.3d at 1231 (first two alterations in original) (quoting James M. Donovan, God Is As God Does: Law, Anthropology, and the Definition of "Religion," 6 Seton Hall Const. L.J. 23, 25 (1995)). Because "homosexuality" or support for gay rights is not a "religion" in any meaningful sense under the Establishment Clause, Sevier's Establishment Clause claim fails as a matter of law.

Although all of Sevier's claims appear to rely on this premise, his equal protection and due process claims fail for other reasons as well. Both merely reiterate Sevier's view (expressed in other lawsuits) that the Constitution gives him the right to marry his computer. Dkt. 1 at 30, 31-32 (Compl. ¶¶ 81, 87). The only relevance these allegations have to his present lawsuit — which again, seeks the removal of gay pride flags — is that those flags "remind[]" him that he cannot presently marry his computer. Id. at 30-31 (Compl. ¶ 82) (emphasis added); accord id. at 32 (Compl. ¶¶ 88-89). Even without passing on Sevier's right to human-laptop marriage, it is safe to say that government activities that remind Sevier of his alleged constitutional injury do not create new constitutional injuries in their own right. These claims, accordingly, will be dismissed for lack of standing. Finally, this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain Sevier's request for a declaratory judgment that Obergefell and Windsor amount to "acts of judicial tyranny." Id. at 35 (Compl. Prayer for Relief). This claim presents no case or controversy. Opining on the judicial propriety of these cases would have no effect on any of the even potentially cognizable allegations of injury made by Sevier. It goes without saying, moreover, that it is not the role of this Court — or any lower court — to review the merits of binding Supreme Court precedent.

For these reasons, the Court will grant Defendants' motion to dismiss.


--- 

[^1]: Editor's Note: The court's discussion of the Motion to Intervene [is here]({{ site.baseurl }}/cases/Sevier_Lowenthal_Intervention). 