---
layout: case

course: Civil Procedure
title: "Johnson v. SWpencer"
cite: '950 F.3d 680'
jurisdiction: '10th Cir.'
published: '2020'
panel: 'Before Holmes, McKay, and Carson, Circuit Judges'
judge: "Holmes, Circuit Judge"
        
---

# Opinion

In 2013, a Wyoming court declared Andrew Johnson actually innocent of crimes for which he was then incarcerated. In 2017, after his release, Mr. Johnson brought suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the City of Cheyenne, Wyoming ("Cheyenne"), the Estate of Detective George Stanford ("the Estate"),1 and Officer Alan Spencer alleging that they were responsible for violations of his constitutional rights that contributed to his conviction ("2017 Action"). While incarcerated, however, Mr. Johnson had unsuccessfully brought similar suits against Cheyenne and Detective Stanford in 1991 ("1991 Action") and against Officer Spencer in 1992 ("1992 Action"). The central question on appeal is what effect the judgments against Mr. Johnson in his 1991 and 1992 Actions have on his 2017 Action.

[ * * * ]
 
[ … ] Cheyenne, the Estate, and Officer Spencer each moved the district court under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) to dismiss the 2017 Action because its claims are precluded by the judgments in the 1991 and 1992 Actions. The district court granted those motions and denied Mr. Johnson's later motions for reconsideration of and relief from that dismissal. [ * * * ] [W]e affirm in part and reverse in part the district court's dismissal of the 2017 Action. More specifically, we affirm the dismissal of the claims against Cheyenne and the Estate because the judgment in the 1991 Action—in which they were the defendants—is entitled to claim-preclusive effect. We reverse, however, the dismissal of the claims against Officer Spencer because the judgment in the 1992 Action—in which he was the defendant—was not on the merits and, thus, is not entitled to claim-preclusive effect.
 
[ * * * ] 


# I. BACKGROUND

# A. Factual Background

Late one night in June 1989, Mr. Johnson ran into a female acquaintance at a bar in Cheyenne and returned with her to the apartment that she shared with her boyfriend, who was away at the time. They drank wine and smoked marijuana in her living room, and Mr. Johnson used his driver's license and picture I.D., which were enclosed in a clear plastic sleeve, to separate marijuana leaves from their stems and seeds for the joints that they smoked. Mr. Johnson and his female acquaintance then left her apartment in her car and visited multiple bars in downtown Cheyenne. Mr. Johnson, however, forgot his license and picture I.D. on the coffee table in his acquaintance's living room.
 
The acquaintance eventually became sick and vomited in her car while Mr. Johnson was driving them to an after-hours club. When Mr. Johnson went inside the club to get some paper towels to clean up her vomit, the acquaintance climbed into the driver's seat and drove herself home. Mr. Johnson returned to find that his acquaintance and her car were gone. He then walked to his home, thirty-five minutes away, and went to sleep.
 
Later that night, from around 3:00 a.m. to 3:10 a.m., the acquaintance's downstairs neighbor heard aggressively loud, periodic knocking on the door to the stairs leading to the acquaintance's upstairs apartment. Eventually, she heard the door's glass window pane shatter, followed by footsteps crossing the broken glass and walking upstairs to the acquaintance's apartment. The neighbor heard the intruder walking around the acquaintance's apartment and then a woman screaming what sounded like "No, no!" The neighbor immediately called the police. While the neighbor was speaking to the police dispatcher, she heard the intruder walk back down the stairs, over the broken glass, and out of the building, less than ten minutes after breaking into the upstairs apartment.
 
When Officer Spencer and Officer Phillip Raybuck of the Cheyenne Police Department arrived about a minute later, they found the acquaintance whimpering hysterically in her bathroom with the door ajar. The rest of the apartment was dark. Officer Spencer later testified at trial that, when they asked the acquaintance to come out of the bathroom, she screamed at them, and it took him a moment to realize that she was repeatedly asking, "Is he still here?" The officers searched her apartment and found no one else. They told her that they were the only ones there and she could open the bathroom door. Officer Spencer testified that the acquaintance opened the door some more—revealing that her hair was mussed, her eyes were wet and red, and her robe was half undone—and she repeatedly said, "He hurt me."
 
According to Mr. Johnson, Officer Spencer must have taken his driver's license and picture I.D. off of the coffee table in the living room and, upon being told by the acquaintance that a man had "hurt" her, showed them to her, "prompting" her "to affirmatively assert Mr. Johnson was that man." Officer Spencer testified that it took him a while to understand what Mr. Johnson allegedly did to the acquaintance because she was still choked up and crying, but that she ultimately led him to believe that Mr. Johnson had sexually assaulted her.
 
Officer Spencer took the acquaintance to a local hospital where she was medically examined and had a sexual-assault kit performed, resulting in the discovery of seminal fluid. Officer Raybuck then went through the acquaintance's apartment taking photographs of the crime scene. Some of these photographs were provided to Mr. Johnson's trial counsel, but others were not.
 
Later that morning, Mr. Johnson was awakened by a police officer knocking on his front door. The officer asked him if he had any knowledge about a burglary and sexual assault that had happened during the night. Mr. Johnson denied having any knowledge of the crimes. The officer then arrested him and took him to jail.
 
Detective Stanford investigated the acquaintance's sexual-assault allegation. He took biological samples from Mr. Johnson pursuant to a warrant and interviewed the acquaintance at least three times. At trial, he testified that the acquaintance called him two days after the sexual assault and told him that she had found Mr. Johnson's eyeglasses in her bedroom—the same eyeglasses, she said, that he had worn at the bars they went to after leaving her apartment on the night she was assaulted. Mr. Johnson claims that his glasses must have been "planted" in the bedroom "by or on behalf of" the acquaintance.
 
At trial, the acquaintance testified that Mr. Johnson broke into her apartment and raped her. She also testified that Mr. Johnson had his I.D. card when they went barhopping after leaving her apartment because he produced his card to enter one of the bars. The prosecution, as mentioned, introduced testimony from Officer Spencer and Detective Stanford about the driver's license, picture I.D., and eyeglasses that were found in the apartment. An expert witness for the prosecution testified that, based on forensic testing, Mr. Johnson was "among the five percent [of the population] who could have left the seminal fluid" recovered by the acquaintance's sexual-assault kit. The jury convicted Mr. Johnson of aggravated burglary and first degree sexual assault. The Supreme Court of Wyoming affirmed his conviction. 
 
Mr. Johnson remained imprisoned for twenty-four years. Then, in August 2013, he was declared actually innocent by a Wyoming court after improved DNA testing revealed that the seminal fluid samples in the acquaintance's sexual-assault kit did not match his DNA but, rather, the DNA of the acquaintance's then-boyfriend. According to Mr. Johnson, the Cheyenne Police Department should not have believed the acquaintance and her boyfriend when they told the police that the boyfriend was out of town for work on the night she was sexually assaulted.

# B. Procedural Background

# 1. The 1991 Action

While incarcerated, Mr. Johnson filed at least two federal civil-rights actions in Wyoming federal district court against those he claimed were responsible for his conviction. The first of these actions was a suit he filed in forma pauperis in 1991 against the City of Cheyenne and Detective Stanford, among other parties. Within seven days of the filing of his original complaint, Mr. Johnson also filed a demand for a jury trial. He then amended his complaint, alleging, inter alia, that Cheyenne had failed to train its officers in proper methods of investigation and that Detective Stanford had violated his constitutional rights during the investigation by, for example, the manner in which the detective interrogated him.
 
About a month after the defendants answered his amended complaint, Mr. Johnson requested a hearing on the complaint and a jury trial. The district court granted him an evidentiary hearing, but denied him a jury trial. At the hearing, Mr. Johnson objected to the court's denial of a jury trial, but his objection was overruled. Near the end of the hearing, the defendants argued that the case was ripe for summary judgment, and the district court responded that they could move for it. The district court also ordered the parties to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. But before the district court entered any findings or conclusions, the case was transferred to another district judge, who, in turn, referred the case to a magistrate judge for a new evidentiary hearing. Mr. Johnson, however, did not object to the new hearing. And it appears that he did not renew his request for a jury trial before the new district judge.
 
At the beginning of the new evidentiary hearing, the magistrate judge denied the defendants' motions for summary judgment, which they had filed after the first evidentiary hearing, because there were genuine disputes of material fact. The magistrate judge indicated that he would be making the relevant findings of fact based on the evidence proffered at the hearing, and Mr. Johnson, again, did not object. The magistrate judge then conducted a bench trial and issued Findings of Fact and Recommendations, advising in the end "[t]hat [Mr. Johnson's] complaint be denied with prejudice." Mr. Johnson filed objections to the magistrate judge's report. The district court overruled his objections and adopted the magistrate judge's recommendations, dismissing Mr. Johnson's claims with prejudice.
 
Mr. Johnson appealed, and a panel of our court entered an order and judgment affirming the district court's judgment.  [ * * * ]

# 2. The 1992 Action

While his 1991 Action was pending, Mr. Johnson filed another federal civil-rights action—this time a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 suit against Officer Spencer. Mr. Johnson alleged that Officer Spencer had violated his due-process rights "by knowingly and willfully giv[ing] false testimony at [his original] jury trial" about the eyeglasses that his acquaintance said that he had worn and she had found in her bedroom. He also moved the district court for leave to proceed in forma pauperis.
 
Before Officer Spencer filed any responsive document, the district court entered an order sua sponte dismissing the complaint with prejudice as frivolous. The court noted that in the 1991 Action it had "concluded there were no facts justifying the plaintiff's claims that his constitutional rights were violated" with respect to the trial evidence about his eyeglasses, and that "[t]he present complaint [wa]s simply another attempt by [him] to revisit the same claim that ha[d] previously been dismissed." The court reviewed the exhibits submitted with the complaint and determined that they did not "establish[ ] even the slightest indication that [Officer Spencer had] made false, or inconsistent[,] statements at the trial." The court held that "Plaintiff ha[d] made no new argument in his complaint and [that the] complaint [wa]s frivolous and completely devoid of merit." The court then went on to hold that, "[e]ven assuming [Mr. Johnson's] constitutional rights were violated by" Officer Spencer, any error was "harmless" in light of the strong evidence of guilt presented at Mr. Johnson's trial. The court described "the evidence and [Officer Spencer's challenged] testimony regarding the eyeglasses" as, "at best, extraneous and cumulative." It then "dismissed [the complaint] with prejudice as frivolous."
 
On appeal, we affirmed, noting that the district court had "dismiss[ed] the action as factually frivolous under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(d)." In doing so, we stated that "Mr. Johnson's lawsuit is based upon an indisputably meritless legal theory because a testifying police officer is entitled to absolute immunity." Thus, "[d]ismissal was appropriate." 
 
# 3. The 2017 Action

After he was exonerated, Mr. Johnson filed a third federal civil-rights action, i.e., the 2017 Action under § 1983. He alleged that Cheyenne, Detective Stanford, Officer Spencer, and unnamed members of Cheyenne's police department violated his constitutional rights. In particular, he alleged that the defendants suppressed photographs of the crime scene that would have exonerated him, failed to preserve those photographs, fabricated evidence by prompting the acquaintance to identify him as the intruder who broke into her apartment, and, as to Cheyenne, failed to have adequate policies and training for its officers.
 
In May 2017, Cheyenne and Officer Spencer separately moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing, inter alia, that the claims against them were precluded by the judgments in the 1991 and 1992 Actions, respectively. The Estate later filed its own motion to dismiss, raising, inter alia, claim preclusion with respect to the 1991 Action. The defendants each attached records from the prior proceedings to their motions.
 
In July 2017, the district court granted all three motions to dismiss. "Although Defendants ... raised several bases for dismissal of Plaintiff's claims against them," the district court concluded that "res judicata, or claim preclusion, bar[red] Plaintiff's ... action and [wa]s therefore dispositive of Defendants' motions to dismiss." In particular, the district court concluded that both the 1991 and 1992 Actions had resulted in final judgments on the merits against Mr. Johnson, had been between the same parties as the 2017 Action, and had concerned the same transaction as the 2017 Action. The district court rejected Mr. Johnson's argument that Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477 (1994)—which held that prisoners may not bring a § 1983 action that calls into question the lawfulness of their conviction until the conviction has been invalidated—implied that the judgments against him in his 1991 and 1992 pre-Heck Actions were not entitled to claim-preclusive effect because his underlying conviction had not yet been invalidated. Although Mr. Johnson had yet to respond to the Estate's motion to dismiss, the court granted it, too, "because the res judicata analysis d[id] not differ and [wa]s equally dispositive as to Detective Stanford."

[ * * * ]

# II. DISCUSSION

The central question in this appeal is whether the judgments in the prior litigation concerning Mr. Johnson's conviction—i.e., the judgments in the 1991 and 1992 Actions—prevent him from bringing a new lawsuit—i.e., the 2017 Action—against the same defendants after his exoneration. The answer turns on the doctrine of claim preclusion. Claim preclusion "prevent[s] a party from litigating a legal claim that was or could have been the subject of a previously issued final judgment." _Lenox MacLaren Surgical Corp. v. Medtronic, Inc._, 847 F.3d 1221, 1239 (10th Cir. 2017). For claim preclusion to apply, "three elements must exist: (1) a [final] judgment on the merits in an earlier action; (2) identity of parties or privies in the two suits; and (3) identity of the cause of action in both suits." _Id._. "[E]ven if these three elements are satisfied, there is an exception to the application of claim preclusion where the party resisting it did not have a 'full and fair opportunity to litigate' the claim in the prior action." _Id._.

[ * * * ]
 
[ … ] [w]e address in Part B whether [the judgments in the 1991 and 1992 Actions] have claim-preclusive effect on the 2017 Action. We conclude that the judgment in the 1991 Action—in which Detective Stanford and Cheyenne were defendants—has claim-preclusive effect. But we conclude that the judgment in the 1992 Action—in which Officer Spencer was the defendant—does not have claim-preclusive effect because that case was not decided "on the merits." We, thus, do the following: (1) reverse the district court's order granting Officer Spencer's Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss the 2017 Action and remand for further proceedings, and (2) affirm the district court's order granting the Estate's and Cheyenne's Rule 12(b)(6) motions to dismiss the 2017 Action.
 
[ * * * ]

# B. The Defendants' Rule 12(b)(6) Motions in the 2017 Action

In the following discussion, we address (1) our standard of review, (2) the general framework governing claim-preclusion, and (3) how that law applies to the 1991 and 1992 Actions. We conclude that the district court correctly held that the 1991 Action has claim-preclusive effect on the 2017 Action, but erred in holding that the 1992 Action has such effect. We, thus, affirm in part and reverse in part.

[ * * * ]

# 2. Background Principles of Claim Preclusion

Before proceeding further into our de novo review, we pause to frame the applicable claim-preclusion doctrine. "The principle underlying the rule of claim preclusion is that a party who once has had a chance to litigate a claim before an appropriate tribunal usually ought not have another chance to do so." _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, 847 F.3d at 1239. "The preclusive effect of a federal-court judgment is determined by federal common law." _Taylor v. Sturgell_, 553 U.S. 880, 891 (2008). We require defendants to prove three elements to prevail on this defense: "(1) a [final] judgment on the merits in an earlier action; (2) identity of parties or privies in the two suits; and (3) identity of the cause of action in both suits." _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, 847 F.3d at 1239. "In addition, even if these three elements are satisfied, there is an exception to the application of claim preclusion where the party resisting it did not have a 'full and fair opportunity to litigate' the claim in the prior action." _Id._ 
 
Although we have at times "characterized the 'full and fair opportunity to litigate' as a fourth requirement of res judicata," we have since clarified that "the absence of a full and fair opportunity to litigate is more appropriately treated as an exception to the application of claim preclusion when the three referenced requirements are met." _MACTEC_, 427 F.3d at 831 n.6.
 
In this case, Mr. Johnson concedes that the district court correctly ruled that the second and third elements of claim preclusion are satisfied here. See Thus, the judgments in the 1991 and 1992 Actions will have claim-preclusive effect against Mr. Johnson so long as they were "on the merits" and he had a "full and fair opportunity to litigate." Although Mr. Johnson argues that the 1992 Action did not provide him with a "full and fair opportunity to litigate," we do not address the merits of that argument because, as explicated below, we agree with his contention that the district court erred in holding that the judgment in that action was "on the merits." The 1992 Action, accordingly, should not have been given claim-preclusive effect. As for the 1991 Action, Mr. Johnson does not argue that the district court erred in concluding that it had entered a judgment "on the merits." Consequently, we take up below solely the question of whether Mr. Johnson had a "full and fair opportunity to litigate" his claims in the 1991 Action. We conclude that he did have such an opportunity. We, thus, affirm that aspect of the district court's claim-preclusion determination.
 
# 3. Application

In the following discussion, as indicated, we focus on whether the 1991 Action provided Mr. Johnson with a "full and fair opportunity to litigate" and whether the 1992 Action was adjudicated "on the merits." As to the 1991 Action, we conclude that Mr. Johnson had a "full and fair opportunity to litigate" his claims because the decision to conduct a bench trial that ostensibly deprived him of that opportunity presented a procedural issue that he had a full and fair opportunity to litigate before the district court, but then waived on appeal, even though he could have fully and fairly litigated it there as well. As to the 1992 Action, in contrast, we conclude that Mr. Johnson correctly contends that the action was not adjudicated "on the merits" because the district court expressly dismissed it as frivolous under the then-applicable 28 U.S.C. § 1915(d). Accordingly, we affirm the district court's dismissal of the claims precluded by the 1991 Action—i.e., those against the Estate and Cheyenne—but reverse its dismissal of the claims ostensibly precluded by the 1992 Action—i.e., those against Officer Spencer.

# a. The 1991 Action is entitled to claim-preclusive effect.

The parties dispute whether the 1991 Action is entitled to claim-preclusive effect and, more specifically, whether it constituted a "full and fair opportunity to litigate." Mr. Johnson also argues that, even if the 1991 Action might give rise to claim preclusion, Cheyenne and the Estate have failed to muster legally sufficient proof to establish this. We reject both arguments and, thus, uphold the district court's dismissal of the claims against Cheyenne and the Estate, i.e., the parties to the 1991 Action.

# i. The "Full and Fair Opportunity to Litigate" Requirement

The "full and fair opportunity to litigate" inquiry is a "narrow exception" that "applies only where the requirements of due process were not afforded—where a party shows 'a deficiency that would undermine the fundamental fairness of the original proceedings.'" _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, 847 F.3d at 1243. "The fairness of the prior proceeding 'is determined by examining any procedural limitations, the party's incentive to fully litigate the claim, and whether effective litigation was limited by the nature or relationship of the parties.'" _Id._ Here, Mr. Johnson argues, [ … ] that the district court's decision in the 1991 Action to convene a bench trial instead of a jury trial was a procedural limitation that denied him a "full and fair opportunity to litigate" his claims. We disagree.
 
As we mentioned, the procedural limitation at issue here—i.e., the denial of a jury trial—is a matter that Mr. Johnson fully litigated before the district court in the 1991 Action and could have fully challenged on appeal, but failed to do. More specifically, after the district court denied Mr. Johnson's motion for a jury trial and started to conduct an evidentiary hearing on his complaint instead, Mr. Johnson objected to that procedure in court. The district court overruled the objection. After his case was assigned to a new district judge, that judge entered judgment for the defendants following a bench trial held about 10 months after the evidentiary hearing. Mr. Johnson appealed from the district court's judgment. Although he could have challenged the process that the district court afforded him, he failed to do so. The judgment in the 1991 Action then became final; any procedural challenges Mr. Johnson could have raised against it were waived by his failure to present them on appeal.
 
As the governing authorities make clear, it is enough for full-and-fair-opportunity-to-litigate purposes that the litigant had a full and fair opportunity to contest the procedural obstacle that ostensibly barred meaningful consideration of his claims. Mr. Johnson had that opportunity here. In this regard, our decision in _Hanley v. Four Corners Vacation Properties, Inc._, is instructive. _See_ 480 F.2d 536 (10th Cir. 1973). In _Hanley_, the plaintiffs-appellants argued that a prior state judgment "was void and subject to collateral attack because of the lack of service of process." _Id._ at 538. The defendants-appellees defended the prior judgment on the ground that "the due process issue [pertaining to the alleged defect in service of process] was fully litigated [previously] in [state court,] culminating in a judgment" against the plaintiffs-appellants. _Id._ at 537. The district court "sustained the defense," holding that the prior judgment should be accorded claim-preclusive effect. _Id._ We affirmed, stating that "[i]t is ... well settled that where the issue of due process has been litigated and a final judgment entered, the determination of that issue, right or wrong, is res judicata." _Id._ at 538. In reaching that holding, we reasoned that the plaintiffs-appellants' due-process concerns were litigated in state court, where "[a]n adequate remedy was available through the state appellate process." _Id._ And we concluded that the plaintiffs-appellants "have had their day in court on these issues and a final judgment entered thereon. They cannot relitigate them in federal court." Id.
 
As in _Hanley_, so too here. Mr. Johnson had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the alleged procedural limitation—i.e., the denial of a jury trial—before the district court in the 1991 Action, and, after the court entered judgment, he had a full and fair opportunity to challenge the court's procedures on appeal before that judgment became final. The fact that he did not present a procedural challenge on appeal does nothing to diminish the opportunity that he had to do so; he simply lost his chance. Like the plaintiffs-appellants in Hanley, Mr. Johnson "had [his] day in court on th[is] issue[ ] and a final judgment entered thereon." _Id._ The district court, therefore, properly determined that he could not "relitigate" the issue in the 2017 Action. _Id._
 
[ * * * ]
 
In sum, it is clear to us that Mr. Johnson cannot escape from the claim-preclusive effect of the 1991 Action based on a procedural argument that was previously litigated and adjudicated in that action and that he had an opportunity to appeal before that judgment became final. Consequently, we reject Mr. Johnson's contention that the 1991 Action did not provide him with a "full and fair opportunity to litigate."
 
# ii. Cheyenne and the Estate carried their burden on the claim-preclusion defense.

Mr. Johnson also contends that, even if the 1991 Action could give rise to claim preclusion, Cheyenne and the Estate have failed to muster legally sufficient proof to establish this. We reject this argument.
 
Mr. Johnson argues that "even if the 1991 ... Action[ ] could give rise to claim preclusion, appellees failed to prove claim preclusion [in their Rule] 12(b)(6) motions." As a threshold matter, we note that much of this argument appears based on the fact that the district court relied on facts not included in the complaint, but we have already explained that the district court's judicial notice of its own records was permissible. Further, because Mr. Johnson is only challenging the district court's claim-preclusion ruling with respect to the 1991 Action on the ground that he was not given a "full and fair opportunity to litigate" his claims there, we most appropriately view his current lack-of-proof argument through that limited lens.
 
That said, we recognize that Mr. Johnson's argument appears to grow out of the lack of clarity in our earlier cases about whether the full-and-fair-opportunity-to-litigate factor should be classified as an "element[ ]" of, or an "exception" to, claim preclusion; we have clarified that it is the latter. Mr. Johnson, however, effectively rejects this clarification and suggests that the district court did not properly allocate the burden of proof—specifically, the burden of persuasion—on Cheyenne and the Estate with respect to the fair-and-full-opportunity-to-litigate factor. 
 
It is beyond cavil that claim preclusion is an affirmative defense, as to which the defendant bears the burden of proof. But at least arguably in our precedential decisions, we have effectively allocated to "the party seeking to avoid preclusion" the burden of proof as to the full-and-fair-opportunity-to-litigate exception. [ * * * ] Be that as it may, we need not definitively opine here on this burden-of-proof question because the district court, in fact, placed the burden of proof for the full-and-fair-opportunity factor—including the burden of persuasion—on the defendants. Insofar as Mr. Johnson suggests that the court's observation that he "failed to rebut" the defendants' proof demonstrates that the court actually placed the burden of proof on him, we disagree. Instead of treating the full-and-fair-opportunity factor as an exception to preclusion, the district court viewed it as one of "'four' res judicata elements" that the defendants had "the burden of showing." The court, therefore, made its observation that Mr. Johnson did not rebut the defendants' proof in the context of its express statement that it had held the defendants to "the burden of showing ... that [Mr. Johnson] had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the claims in the prior suits." Accordingly, Mr. Johnson has no basis to object to the district court's allocation of the burden of proof as to the full-and-fair-opportunity-to-litigate factor because the court allocated the burden as he desired.

[ * * * ]
 
In sum, we reject Mr. Johnson's argument that Cheyenne and the Estate have failed to muster legally sufficient proof to establish claim preclusion as to the 1991 Action.

# iii. Heck v. Humphrey Redux

Mr. Johnson also returns to an iteration of his _Heck_ argument. He argues that, under _Heck_, he could not have brought the claims in his 2017 Action until he was exonerated in 2013 and so the district court erred in deeming those claims precluded by his earlier actions. [ * * * ]
 
Mr. Johnson's argument starts with _Heck_'s teaching that, to determine whether a prisoner's conviction has prevented his § 1983 claim pertaining to that conviction from accruing, courts "must consider whether a judgment in favor of the plaintiff would necessarily imply the invalidity of his conviction or sentence." 512 U.S. at 487. "[I]f it would, the complaint must be dismissed unless the plaintiff can demonstrate that the conviction or sentence has already been invalidated." _Id._ Mr. Johnson adds to those principles from _Heck_ our statement in _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_ that "claim preclusion does not bar subsequent litigation of new claims based on facts the plaintiff did not and could not know when it filed its complaint." 847 F.3d at 1244. Combining _Heck_ and _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, Mr. Johnson reasons that "[s]ince invalidation of [his] conviction[ ] was a non-existent fact at the time of [his] prior actions, he could not have brought his present claims in [those] prior actions." He, in other words, argues that his claims did not begin accruing until he was exonerated.
 
But this argument runs into similar problems as those discussed above. Regardless of whether the district court in the 1991 Action should have held—even before _Heck_ was decided—that Mr. Johnson's claims were not cognizable under § 1983, the 1991 Action nonetheless adjudicated Mr. Johnson's claims against Detective Stanford and Cheyenne. Following his appeal, the judgment in that case became final, and that final judgment will have claim-preclusive effect on the 2017 Action if the elements of preclusion are met. Because Mr. Johnson concedes that the district court correctly ruled that the second and third elements of claim preclusion are satisfied here, the 1991 Action will have claim-preclusive effect so long as it was "on the merits" and provided a "full and fair opportunity to litigate." But Mr. Johnson does not argue that the district court erred in concluding that the 1991 Action was "on the merits," and we have already rejected his argument that the action did not provide a "full and fair opportunity to litigate." And so the judgment in the 1991 Action has precluded claims like those in the 2017 Action from the time it became final.
 
The Supreme Court's later opinion in _Heck_ did nothing to disturb the parties' reliance on that final judgment: "once suit is barred by res judicata or by statutes of limitation or repose, a new rule cannot reopen the door already closed." J_ames B. Beam Distilling_, 501 U.S. at 541.
 
We, thus, reject Mr. Johnson's argument that the claims in the 2017 Action were not precluded by the 1991 Action because they were not cognizable under § 1983 until after he was exonerated.

[ * * * ]

In sum, we hold that the claims in the 2017 Action against Cheyenne and the Estate are precluded by the 1991 Action. We, thus, affirm the dismissal of those claims.
 
# b. The 1992 Action is not entitled to claim-preclusive effect.

With respect to the 1992 Action, Mr. Johnson primarily disputes the first element of claim preclusion, i.e., whether there was "a [final] judgment on the merits." _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, 847 F.3d at 1239. We recount the relevant procedural history before agreeing with Mr. Johnson that the 1992 Action was not adjudicated "on the merits" and, therefore, did not have claim-preclusive effect on the 2017 Action. We, thus, reverse the district court's dismissal of the claims against Officer Spencer—the only defendant in the 1992 Action—and remand for further proceedings on those claims. Because we conclude that the 1992 Action was not adjudicated "on the merits," we need not entertain Mr. Johnson's separate argument that the 1992 Action did not afford him a "full and fair opportunity to litigate."
 
# i. Relevant Procedural History

Mr. Johnson's 1992 Action was a § 1983 suit alleging that Officer Spencer violated his due-process rights by providing false testimony about his eyeglasses at his criminal trial. The district court dismissed the complaint sua sponte with prejudice as frivolous, (1) noting that in the 1991 Action it had "concluded there were no facts justifying the plaintiff's claims that his constitutional rights were violated" and (2) holding that "[t]he present complaint [wa]s simply another attempt by plaintiff to revisit the same claim that has previously been dismissed." The court reviewed the exhibits that Mr. Johnson had submitted with his complaint and concluded that they did not "establish[ ] even the slightest indication that [Officer Spencer] made false, or inconsistent statements at the trial." The court, in conclusion, observed that Mr. Johnson had "made no new argument in his complaint" and, thus, held that his complaint was "frivolous and completely devoid of merit." 
 
Further, the district court stated that "[e]ven assuming [Mr. Johnson's] constitutional rights were violated by [Officer Spencer], ... it was harmless error." The court held in particular that "no reasonable possibility existed to believe the evidence of [Mr. Johnson's] eyeglasses ... might have contributed to his conviction" because there was other evidence—viz., the acquaintance's identification of him, the presence of his driver's license and picture I.D. in her apartment, and the forensic evidence tying him to the seminal fluid preserved in the acquaintance's sexual-assault kit—that had established Mr. Johnson's guilt. The court, thus, concluded that Officer Spencer's trial testimony about Mr. Johnson's eyeglasses "was[,] at best, extraneous and cumulative." The court then "dismissed [the complaint] with prejudice as frivolous," noting that Mr. Johnson had filed several related lawsuits, "all of which [we]re frivolous and vexatious in nature." The court subsequently underscored the basis for its action, after noting that it had "come to the attention of the court" that Mr. Johnson's in forma pauperis motion was still pending. The court noted that it had recently determined that Mr. Johnson "ha[d] failed to present a rational argument on the facts or law in support of his clam ... and that the complaint [wa]s frivolous and devoid of merit." "Therefore," the court denied Mr. Johnson's in forma pauperis motion. 
 
On appeal from that judgment, we noted that the district court "dismiss[ed] the action as factually frivolous" and affirmed on the ground that "Mr. Johnson's lawsuit is based upon an indisputably meritless legal theory because a testifying police officer is entitled to absolute immunity." 

# ii. The "On the Merits" Requirement

As mentioned, a successful claim-preclusion defense requires "a [final] judgment on the merits in [the] earlier action." _Lenox MacLaren Surgical_, 847 F.3d at 1239. Mr. Johnson argues that the 1992 Action was not an adjudication "on the merits" because the suit was dismissed as frivolous. We agree.
 
The Supreme Court settled this question in _Denton v. Hernandez_, 504 U.S. 25 (1992). There, the Court addressed "the appropriate inquiry for determining when an in forma pauperis litigant's factual allegations justify a § 1915(d) dismissal for frivolousness." _Id._ at 27. In doing so, the Court stated that "[b]ecause a § 1915(d) dismissal is not a dismissal on the merits, but rather an exercise of the court's discretion under the in forma pauperis statute, the dismissal does not prejudice the filing of a paid complaint making the same allegations." _Id._ at 34.
 
In the 1992 Action, the district court expressly relied on the then-existing § 1915(d) in dismissing Mr. Johnson's claim as "frivolous and completely devoid of merit." And so, following Denton, we conclude that the district court's dismissal of the 1992 Action was not "on the merits." 
 
Officer Spencer argues against this straightforward conclusion. He first contends that while it is "[g]enerally" true that a § 1915(d) dismissal is not "on the merits" when it is for factual frivolousness, the dismissal here should be deemed "on the merits" for claim-preclusion purposes because the district court additionally determined that Mr. Johnson's claims were not legally meritorious because any error was harmless. We reject this argument. The old § 1915(d) allowed district courts to dismiss a complaint as frivolous when it "lack[ed] an arguable basis either in law or in fact." Although the Court in Denton emphasized that § 1915(d) provided courts with "the unusual power to pierce the veil of the complaint's factual allegations," _Denton_, 504 U.S. at 32, thereby deviating from the Rule 12(b)(6) standard of largely "accept[ing] without question the truth of the plaintiff's allegations," the Court ultimately drew no distinction between § 1915(d) dismissals for legal frivolity and those for factual frivolity when it stated that "a § 1915(d) dismissal is not a dismissal on the merits." _Id._ at 32, 34. While Denton itself specifically addressed a factually frivolous complaint, its rule that § 1915(d) dismissals are not on the merits contemplated § 1915(d) dismissals generally, i.e., dismissals based on both legal and factual frivolity. 
 
_Denton_ created a simple rule applying to all dismissals for frivolousness under the pre-1996 § 1915(d), regardless of whether the frivolousness was legal or factual, and we apply that rule here. The district court explicitly based its dismissal on § 1915(d). Although the court appended to the end of its order a one-paragraph discussion of the harmlessness of any purported error, that discussion did not transform the dismissal into a merits adjudication. Because the 1992 Action was not adjudicated on the merits, it has no preclusive effect on Mr. Johnson's paid complaint in the 2017 Action.
 
Officer Spencer also cites _Bell v. Hood_, 327 U.S. 678, 682 (1946), for the proposition that if a court "exercise[s] its jurisdiction to determine that the allegations in the complaint do not state a ground for relief, then dismissal of the case would be on the merits, not for want of jurisdiction." But that general proposition in _Bell_ does not address whether frivolousness determinations are on the merits, as the very next sentence makes clear. _See Bell_, 327 U.S. at 682 (indicating that one of the "exceptions" to that proposition is "that a suit may sometimes be dismissed for want of jurisdiction where the alleged claim ... is wholly insubstantial and frivolous"). Therefore, we conclude that this proposition in _Bell_ does nothing to limit the breadth of _Denton_'s relevant pronouncement.
 
Relatedly, Officer Spencer relies on the Ninth Circuit's statement that "a dismissal for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6) is a 'judgment on the merits' to which res judicata applies." _Stewart v. U.S. Bancorp_, 297 F.3d 953, 957 (9th Cir. 2002). But that uncontroversial statement simply has no application here. The district court did not sua sponte dismiss the claim at issue here pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6); it expressly invoked § 1915(d). Stewart's discussion of Rule 12(b)(6) therefore has nothing to contribute to Denton's interpretation of § 1915(d).
 
Finally, the parties dispute whether an order with two holdings, one "on the merits" and one not, can have claim-preclusive effect. But we need not wade into this dispute. Notwithstanding the district court's discussion of harmlessness, its judgment in the 1992 Action was expressly and solely bottomed on a dismissal under § 1915(d) (1993). The court did not purport to rule on the merits, but instead dismissed under § 1915(d) on frivolousness grounds. And _Denton_ settles the question that such dismissals are not on the merits. _See_ 504 U.S. at 34. This is not a case where the district court made two holdings—one on the merits and one not—and so the claim-preclusive effects of such a circumstance are not before us.
 
In sum, because it was not an adjudication on the merits, we conclude that the 1992 Action cannot operate with claim-preclusive effect on the 2017 Action. We, thus, reverse the district court's order dismissing the 2017 Action's claims against Officer Spencer. Because we reverse that order based on the "on the merits" element of claim preclusion, we need not and do not address whether the district court's order was also erroneous because it determined that the 1992 Action provided Mr. Johnson with a "full and fair opportunity to litigate."


[ * * * ]
 
# III. CONCLUSION

We acknowledge the terrible reality that Mr. Johnson must have faced during the twenty-four years that he was wrongly incarcerated. As the Supreme Court has stated, however, the doctrine of claim preclusion "serves vital public interests beyond any individual judge's ad hoc determination of the equities in a particular case." _Moitie_, 452 U.S. at 401. Thus, for the reasons we have provided, in the 2017 Action, we affirm the dismissal of the claims against the Estate and Cheyenne, but reverse the dismissal of the claims against Officer Spencer and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. [ * * * ]
